(♪ singing in French)
Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years; take this key,
give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither:
He must carry me a letter to my love.
A message well sympathized;
Horse to be ambassador for an ass.
Ha, ha! what sayest thou?
Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse,
for he is very slow-gaited. But I go sir.
As swift as lead.
The meaning, pretty ingenious?
Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
I say lead is slow.
You are too swift, sir, to say so:
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
A most acute juvenal; voluble and free of grace!
By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy l'envoy; begin.
No enigma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the mail,
O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain!
no l'envoy, no l'envoy; no salve, sir, but a plantain!
By virtue, thou enforcest laughter;
thy silly thought my spleen; the heaving of my lungs
provokes me to ridiculous smiling.
O, pardon me, my stars!
Doth the inconsiderate take salve for l'envoy, for a salve?
Do the wise think them other? is not l'envoy a salve?
No, page: it is some epilogue or discourse, to make plain
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
I will example it:
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.
I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Until the goose came out of door,
And stay'd the odds by adding four.
Now will I begin your moral,
and do you follow with my l'envoy.
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Until the goose came out of door,
Staying the odds by adding four.
A good l'envoy, ending in the goose:
would you desire more?
How did this argument begin?
By saying here's a costard broken in a shin.
Then call'd you for the l'envoy.
True, and I for a plantain:
But tell me; how was there a costard broken in a shin?
I will tell you sensibly.
Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth:
I will speak that l'envoy:
I Costard, running out, that was safely within,
Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
We will talk no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
O, marry me to one Frances:
I smell some l'envoy, some goose, in this.
By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured,
restrained, captivated, bound.
True, true; and now you will be my purgation
and let me loose.
I will give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance;
and, in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this:
bear this significant to the country maid Jaquenetta:
there is remuneration; for the best ward of mine
honour is rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.
Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration!
O, that's the Latin word for three farthings:
three farthings-- remuneration.--
'What's the price of this inkle?'
--'One penny.'--'No, I'll give you a remuneration:'
why, it carries it. Remuneration!
why, it is a fairer name than French crown.
I will never buy and sell out of this word.
O, my good knave Costard! exceedingly well met.
Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man
buy for a remuneration?
What is a remuneration?
Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
I thank your worship: God be wi' you!
Stay, slave; I must employ thee:
As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
When would you have it done, sir?
This afternoon.
Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.
Thou knowest not what it is.
I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
Why, villain, thou must know first.
I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
It must be done this afternoon.
Hark, slave, it is but this:
The princess comes to hunt here in the park,
And in her train there is a gentle lady;
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her: ask for her;
And to her white hand see thou do commend
This seal'd-up counsel. There's thy guerdon; go.
Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration,
a'leven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon!
I will do it sir, in print. Gardon! Remuneration!
And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been love's whip;
A very beadle to a humorous sigh;
A critic, nay, a night-watch constable;
A domineering pedant o'er the boy;
Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy;
This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;
Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Sole imperator and great general
Of trotting 'paritors:--O my little heart:--
And I to be a corporal of his field,
And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop!
What, I! I love! I sue! I seek a wife!
A woman, that is like a German clock,
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch,
But being watch'd that it may still go right!
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;
And, among three, to love the worst of all;
A wightly wanton with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;
Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard:
And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!
To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan:
Some men must love my lady and some Joan.